# MURI Topic 18: Tensor Networks and Low-Rank Methods for High-Dimensional Computing

There are Department of Defense (DoD) grand challenge problems that are beyond modern computing capabilities, yet we face an ever-increasing instances when understanding such complex dynamics is essential. Examples include clean energy systems (fusion), virtual war gaming, space weather, hypersonic flight, to name but a few. Understanding these systems in a non-stationary non-equilibrium state where each of the N agents in the system may experience its local dynamics influenced by N−1 other agents is the grand challenge problem. 

## Center Introduction

Our key innovations center on structure-preserving tensor network algorithms with enhanced highperformance tensor computing capabilities for simulating high-dimensional time-dependent kinetic equations. These include six-dimensional-plus PDEs arising in non-equilibrium kinetic plasma simulations and extremely high-dimensional generalized kinetic models for stochastic differential equations (SDEs) when modeling uncertainty of complex systems. At the center of our research effort is to exploit the inherent lowrank structure of time-dependent kinetic solutions via dynamic approximations of solutions on hierarchical tensor networks. Such representations lead to significantly reduced computational complexity that scales linearly with respect to dimension and polynomially with respect to rank, overcoming the well-known curse of dimensionality (CoD). Through this endeavor, we aim to pioneer first-principle non-equilibrium plasma modeling and simulations and develop a general framework for understanding uncertainty and control associated with stochastic dynamics systems.  

## Team vision

Our team aims to leverage the latest advancements in low-rank tensor network computations for accelerating high-dimensional time-dependent kinetic simulations. Key challenges include how to evolve low-rank tensor network dynamics in a multi-scale setting effectively; how to realize structure preservation with low-rank efficiency, such as conservation laws and multi-scale model asymptotics; how to leverage 1empirical simulation data to learn tensor network decomposition for extremely high-dimensional solutions. These questions lead to core challenges in tensor linear algebra, e.g., how to efficiently seek low-rank tensor representation to functions and operators and perform tensor optimization with structural constraints.
Our team efforts are organized around three core thrusts, tackling the challenges mentioned above in a divide-and-conquer fashion. In Thrust 1, targeted at nonequilibrium plasma models, our research effort centers around developing high-order multi-scale time integrators evolving dynamics around low-rank tensor manifolds with an emphasis on structure preservation. In Thrust 2, we consider tensor network approaches for generalized kinetic models for SDEs. Novel data-driven learning of tensor network decomposition and model reduction are proposed to overcome the key challenge of extremely high-dimensionality. In the last thrust, we will develop efficient tensor decomposition and optimization tools that provide foundational support for tensor computation tasks arising from the previous two thrusts. To this end, we aim to build a systematical set of accelerated tensor network PDE solvers with structure preservation and data-driven learning. Such efforts will enable efficient and accurate simulations of high-dimensional models that surpass existing computational capabilities in both direct forward simulations and the associated UQ and control.


## High-dimensional computing: a landscape

Despite recent progress in using deep learning to solve high-dimensional PDEs, direct accurate numerical simulations of high-dimensional timedependent PDEs remains a challenging research area. Meanwhile, low-rank tensor network approximation of high-dimensional functions has emerged as an effective way to address the CoD across various fields, such as data science, statistics, machine learning and physics. Characterized by their network structures, such tensor decompositions harness the intrinsic low-rank structure in a hierarchical way. Yet, it is still a vastly open area to capture low-rank manifolds with structure preservation in a setting involving complex high-dimensional dynamics. Our research complements and leverages upon existing developments on scientific machine learning, reduced order modeling, tensor networks and uncertainty quantification (UQ), which represents a new research front on tensor network computations for non-stationary complex PDE models; it will also lead to a better understanding of UQ and optimal control problems in a general setting, via direct tensor network computations and contraction of high-dimensional probability density functions (PDFs). 

